2543 add view and update participant data guidance pages (#1789)
DFE-Digital/register-early-career-teachers-public: app/views/api/guidance/guidance_for_lead_providers/view_participant_data.md

## Which ECTs or mentors are surfaced in the `GET /participants` endpoints 

Lead providers will see any participants from a school where both: 

1. The school has stated at some point they’re the lead provider for that participant.  
2. The lead provider has either submitted a partnership or it’s been rolled over from a previous cohort by the school. 

This includes cases, if the partnership exists, where: 

* the school later changes lead provider for that participant
* the school later changes programme type to school-led for that participant
* the participant later leaves the school 

This should mean participants will not ‘disappear’ in the `GET /participants` endpoints except in cases where they shouldn't have been visible in the first place. For example, if they were incorrectly registered or never started at a school. 

## What providers can use participant data for 

Providers can use this data to check whether participants: 

* have started their induction (`overall_induction_start_date`), and are therefore eligible for funding 
* have transferred to or from a school they’re partnered with 
* have (if they’re ECTs) an assigned unfunded mentor 

> * have (if they’re ECTs) completed induction, according to the Database of Qualified Teachers 

Author: Cool. I'll edit this.

| `deferred` | Participant has paused training | Cannot update participant data. Can only submit backdated declarations if `declaration_date` is before `deferral_date`. Providers must notify us when the participant resumes | 
| `withdrawn` | Participant has left training | Cannot update participant data. Can only submit backdated declarations if `declaration_date` is before `withdrawal_date` | 

The following table explains what the participant status fields mean. 

| `participant_status` | Definition | 
| ------------ | ------------- | 
| `joining` | ECT is due to join the school. Will update to `active` on the same day as the school’s reported start date for the ECT. Also applies to mentors in transfer cases where a joining date exists | 
| `active` | Participant is currently at the school | 
| `leaving` | Participant is due to leave the school. Will update to left after the leaving date passes | 
| `left` | Participant has left a school, been reassigned to a different lead provider, had their programme type changed to `school-led`, or been withdrawn or deferred by a lead provider | 
 
### Example of how statuses for participants can differ 

> A provider records a participant as `training_status = active` because they're still completing training. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API shows a participant as `training_status = active` because they're still completing training. 
```

> At the same time, the API records the participant as `participant_status = leaving`, with a leaving date set for the end of term. 

Author: Should I change this line to the following?

At the same time the school informs us that the participant is leaving, with a leaving date set for the end of term. This triggers the `participant_status` to change to `leaving`.

> At the same time, the API records the participant as `participant_status = leaving`, with a leaving date set for the end of term. 

Author: Cool, I'll change lines 102 and 104.

Read our guidance on [how we assign participant schedules](/api/guidance/guidance-for-lead-providers/how-we-assign-participant-schedules).  

## Which ECTs or mentors are surfaced in the `GET /participants` endpoints 

Lead providers will see any participants from a school where both: 

1. The school has stated at some point they’re the lead provider for that participant.  
2. The lead provider has either submitted a partnership or it’s been rolled over from a previous cohort by the school. 

This includes cases, if the partnership exists, where: 

* the school later changes lead provider for that participant
* the school later changes programme type to school-led for that participant
* the participant later leaves the school 

This should mean participants will not ‘disappear’ in the `GET /participants` endpoints except in cases where they shouldn't have been visible in the first place. For example, if they were incorrectly registered or never started at a school. 

## What providers can use participant data for 

Providers can use this data to check whether participants: 

* have a valid teacher reference number (TRN) and qualified teacher status (QTS) 

> * are eligible for funding 

Reviewer: we could be more specific 'are eligible for funding, which means their induction has been recorded as started'

Author: Could it be flipped to "have started their induction (`overall_induction_start_date`), and are therefore eligible for funding"?

* have transferred to or from a school they’re partnered with 
* have (if they’re ECTs) an assigned unfunded mentor 

> * have (if they’re ECTs) completed induction, according to the Database of Qualified Teachers 

Reviewer: or started now, as we've added overall_induction_start_date

Providers will continue to see participants if they’ve ever had a confirmed partnership with them, even if: 
 
* their school later changes
* their lead provider or delivery partner changes
* their induction programme type (ECF-based or school-based) changes 

This ensures historical and funding continuity for their records. 

## Retrieve multiple participants 

Providers can use the `GET /participants` endpoint to retrieve data for multiple participants.  

The following table shows the filters providers can use within this endpoint. 

| Filter | Description | Example | 
| ------------ | ------------- | ------------- | 
| `filter[cohort]` | Restrict results to a specific cohort |`filter[cohort]=2025` | 
| `filter[cohort]` | Return results for multiple cohorts | `filter[cohort]=2023,2024,2025` | 
| `filter[updated_since]` | Return only records updated after a specific date | `filter[updated_since]=2025-09-01T00:00:00Z` | 

## Retrieve a single participant 
 
Providers can use the `GET /participants/{id}` endpoint to view individual records. 

The following table explains the key participant fields. 

| Field | Description |  
| ------------ | ------------- |  

> | `eligible_for_funding` | For ECTs, becomes `true` once the participant’s induction is confirmed by an appropriate body. It will never revert to `false` | 

Reviewer: ignore my earlier point if we address this here!
